---
title: CS 609: Human Factors in Programming Languages
---
<style>
td {
  padding: 0;
  padding-right: 2ex;
  vertical-align: top;
}
</style>

# CS 609 Diskussionsseminar: Human Factors in Programming Languages

<div class="no-print">

## Quick Links

 *  [Logistics]
 *  [Motivation]
 *  [Structure of Course]
 *  [Schedule and Reading Assignments]

</div>

## Logistics

----------------  -------------------------------------------------------------
Instructor:       Eric Walkingshaw
                  <span class="marburg-email"></span>
Weekly meeting:   Mondays, 16:00 -- 17:30
                  Seminarraum V (05-D09)
Course web page:  <http://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~walkiner/teaching/cs609-wi14/>
                  (This document, which will be updated throughout the course.)
----------------  -------------------------------------------------------------


## Motivation

Most programming language research is focused on formal qualities like type
safety and correctness, or else on machine-centric qualities like efficiency.
However, a programming language is ultimately intended to be used by a human.
The languages we use shape the way we approach, understand, and attempt to
solve problems. Good languages can not only help professional programmers be
more productive and solve harder problems, they can empower non-traditional
programmers by making computing more accessible.

In this seminar, we will focus on human aspects of programming language design.
We will discuss theories from cognitive science related to programming and how
these theories can be applied to improve the design of programming languages.
We will discuss human-centric language design methodologies and theoretical
frameworks for analyzing the usability of programming languages. Finally, we
will study the unique challenges of designing a language for the huge and
rapidly growing class of non-traditional, end-user programmers.

In addition to the general goals of a discussion seminar (exposure to research,
practice reading and discussing papers, etc.) the specific goals of this
seminar are to:

 * Motivate end-user programming and user-focused language design.
 * Develop a vocabulary for discussing language and interface design issues
   related to usability.
 * Develop a "toolbox" of theories and strategies that you can apply to your
   own design problems.
 * Practice applying these tools to a specific problem of your choice.
   

## Structure of Course

The seminar will be divided into two phases. During the first and longer phase,
we will function as a reading group. During the second and shorter phase, you
will apply your new knowledge to a language or interface design problem, and
share your design with the group.


### Phase 1: Reading Group

This phase will last for the first ten weeks or so of the semester.

Each week I will assign a paper, book chapter, or other reading for our next
meeting. I will also provide a brief motivation for why I selected the reading
in order to help you understand the paper in the context of the seminar. All
participants will read the assigned reading each week.

One participant will lead the discussion at each meeting. 

If you are *not* the discussion leader, you must submit 2-3 discussion topics
or questions to the discussion leader and to me. This is intended to encourage
you to think critically about the paper before you arrive at the meeting, and
so will hopefully lead to more interesting discussions.

If you *are* the discussion leader, you should use the submitted questions to
guide your preparation. Most importantly, you should *dig deeper* in order to
answer questions or provide additional insights. This will usually require
looking into related work.

During the discussion, the discussion leader will briefly summarize the main
points of each section, pose topics for discussion, attempt to answer
questions, offer additional insights, and keep the discussion on track.
Everyone else should come prepared to discuss the paper! Not only will this be
more lively and fun, it will make the discussion leader's job much easier.

To summarize, your responsibilities during this phase of the seminar are to:

 1. Read the assigned reading each week.
 2. Submit discussion topics/questions to me and the discussion leader 24 hours
    before each meeting.
 3. Attend and participate in the discussions.
 4. Prepare for the discussions that you will lead (dig deeper).


### Phase 2: Application to a Design Problem

This phase will last for the final 2-3 weeks of the semester, although you will
probably start working on it earlier.

In this phase, you will apply your knowledge from the previous phase to a small
design project. You will pick a single, specific user and a domain of
programming tasks that the user would like to accomplish for their work or in
their every day life. The user may be anyone that you have access to except for
another computer science student. A family member or colleague in another field
may be a good choice; they may be either programmer or non-programmer. The
motivation for picking a single user is to focus the design in the spirit of
[situated software](http://www.shirky.com/writings/situated_software.html). 

In your design, you should employ at least two of the design strategies and
intellectual tools that we discussed earlier in the semester. You will submit a
short (2-3 page) writeup describing your design and its rationale, and present
a storyboard illustrating the design at one of the final seminar meetings.

More details on the final design project will be provided later in the
semester.


## Schedule and Reading Assignments

<table class="schedule">
<tr class="schedule-row">
  <td class="schedule-date">**15 Oct**</td>
  <td class="schedule-info">Course introduction, schedule a weekly meeting time.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="schedule-row">
  <td class="schedule-date">**21 Oct**</td>
  <td class="schedule-info">
  Alan Blackwell, *First Steps in Programming: A Rationale for Attention Investment
  Models*, 2002.
  
  This paper serves two roles. First, it provides definitions of "programmer"
  and "programming" that are somewhat broader than you might expect. This will
  help us to define the scope of the seminar. In particular, we will consider
  many aspects of what might traditionally be called "user interface design" to
  be within our purview as language designers. Second, it introduces the
  *attention investment* model, which can help to understand when a user will
  invest effort in learning a new language or feature, and suggests strategies
  for encouraging this investment.
  </td>
</tr>
</table>

