Graphical user interfaces (GUIs) are a major source of bugs in real-world software systems that are notoriously difficult to prevent through traditional type systems or automated testing. Although there have been huge achievements in verified software, work on verifying GUI applications is underdeveloped relative to their ubiquity and societal importance. In this paper, we present a library for the development of verified, state-dependent GUI applications in the dependently typed programming language Agda. The type system will make the GUI more dependable by ensuring that the GUI, its controller, and the underlying model are all consistent, significantly reducing the scope for GUI-related bugs. We provide a way to specify and prove correctness properties of GUI applications in terms of user interactions and state transitions. Critically, GUI applications and correctness properties are not restricted to finite state machines and may involve the execution of arbitrary interactive programs. We present applications of our library to building GUI applications with associated correctness properties to managing healthcare processes. The properties we consider are the following: (1) That a state can only be reached by passing through a particular intermediate state, for example, that a particular treatment can only be reached after having conducted an X-Ray. (2) That one eventually reaches a particular state, for example, that one eventually decides on a treatment. The specification of those properties is defined in terms of a GUI application simulator, which simulates all possible sequences of interactions carried out by the user. 
