---
title: My Tenure Denial
---

# My tenure denial

I was denied tenure at Oregon State University (OSU). This page is basically me
processing that fact.

I'm sharing it on the internet because it's a taboo subject in academia that
you mostly only hear about after someone is successful again at another
university or in another context. I am not yet successful again! I am in the
midst of a major life and career crisis here! If you are too, maybe the fact
that someone else is going through this helps you in some way.

There's also an element of self-preservation to sharing this publicly. When
you're denied tenure, people wonder why. If your record looks OK, they might
reasonably wonder if you were denied because of an ethical violation of some
kind. I wasn't, and writing about what happened will hopefully help curb such
speculation.

<div style="color: red">
**NOTE: This little essay is incomplete and I hadn't meant to post it yet!
However, I received an email from someone who found it and said it resonated
with them, then checked my Google Analytics (sorry for spying on you!) and
found that it was my most read page in the last month (eek!). So I'm leaving it
up in its incomplete state until I get a chance to finish it, which will be
hopefully soon.**
</div>


## How the tenure process works

Since I'm sharing this with friends, family, and students who may not know how
the tenure process works (and why I can't just apply again next year), here's a
quick summary.

At most universities in the US and Canada, new professors are hired on a
probationary basis as so-called "assistant professors". During your sixth year,
you undergo a major evaluation, the outcome of which determines whether you:
(1) get promoted to "associate professor" with tenure and have a mostly
guaranteed job for the rest of your life, or (2) get fired.

If you get denied tenure, that's it. You have one year to tidy up loose ends,
help your grad students finish their degrees if you can, then you leave to find
a new job.

The promotion and tenure evaluation process involves dozens of people,
including external reviewers from other universities (or sometimes industry)
within your research area, a committee within your department that spends a
significant amount of time evaluating your case, all of the tenured faculty
within your department who vote based on the findings of the department
committee, and multiple committees at higher levels of the university.

The evaluation ostensibly focuses on all aspects of being a professor. This
includes research productivity (papers and grants) and research impact,
teaching quality, service to the university, service to your research
community, and contributions to diversity and inclusion in the university and
in your field. In practice, however, research productivity and impact tends to
dominate the evaluation at [R1 universities][R1] like OSU.

Some of the details and timelines vary across universities, but the model
described above is how it works at OSU and is very typical.


## How and why I was denied tenure

**TODO**

For now, [here is my letter requesting a grievance hearing][letter], which
contains my side of the story as of September 2020. I know more details about
what happened now, thanks to information I was granted as a result of this
grievance process, which I'll describe when I write this section later.


## What it feels like

Really terrible! Here's a sample:

 * **Embarrassed.** Getting denied tenure is somewhat rare,[^rare] so it's
   extremely embarrassing both professionally and personally. 

   I am friends with many of my colleagues that were on the same tenure-track
   timeline as me, both within my department and across the university. The
   university makes a big deal of [celebrating all of the newly tenured
   faculty][celebrate]. I am unreservedly happy for them, but it's also painful
   to see everyone celebrated without me. Like, from the university's
   perspective, I did nothing worth celebrating in the last six years and
   they're ashamed to have had me there at all!

   I am well-known in my little research niches and have a huge network of
   friends, collaborators, and acquaintances around the world. They will soon
   find out (possibly by reading this) that I was denied tenure. They know that
   it's rare and some will probably lose some respect for me and my work.

   My family and my in-laws were proud of the fact that I was a professor.
   Nobody in my family even *knew* a professor before me. I was a
   first-generation college student and "professor" is a high-prestige job that
   they were proud of me for, and which I now failed at.

 * **Isolated.** Because tenure denial is rare and embarrassing, it's also a
   bit taboo. There's no announcement of tenure denials, just an announcement
   of those that were promoted and awarded tenure; the denials (me) to be
   inferred by omission.

   Surprisingly few people reached out to me after the announcement. I suspect
   many were trying to avoid prodding an open wound (and I certainly don't hold
   it against anyone), but the effect combined with self-isolating during a
   pandemic left me feeling very isolated from the rest of my colleagues. I am
   profoundly thankful to those who did reach out.

   However, the feeling of isolation started well before the final
   announcement. In February, when I got the negative recommendation from the
   College, I only told my wife and a small handful of friends and senior
   colleagues whose advice I sought. For the rest of the year, I felt like I
   had a dirty little secret that was impacting my behavior and motivation in
   subtle ways, but which I was too embarrassed to share.
   
 * **Angry.** If I had received one more large grant, I almost certainly would
   have been awarded tenure. Given the arbitrariness of the funding process and
   that I came very close to winning multiple additional grants, it is
   maddening that this played such a major role in a decision that affects the
   rest of my life.

   Also, I poured my heart into making OSU the best place to work, teach, and
   learn. This is reflected in my work for the faculty union, additional
   outreach to students, and the significant effort I invested in teaching and
   all of my service obligations. None of this work was valued by the
   university at all. Through my grievance, I obtained transcripts of the
   University-level discussion of my P&T case where the decision to deny was
   made. Besides being full of frustrating factual errors, the most infuriating
   thing is that the following two sentences were the *entire* discussion about
   aspects of my case outside of research productivity: "His teaching reviews
   are very strong. He's a good citizen."

 * **Resentful.** I was a strong faculty candidate coming out of graduate
   school and chose to come back to OSU as a faculty member because my wife and
   I love Corvallis and I loved OSU.

   I underestimated how much coming back would negatively affect my research
   career (despite accurate warnings from some senior colleagues in my research
   community). When you change institutions, you get a whole new set of people
   to collaborate with. Instead, I had only one other researcher in my area (my
   former advisor) whom I was recommended against collaborating with. Despite
   mostly not collaborating with him,[^martin] my supposed lack of independence
   was a factor in being denied tenure.

   Ultimately, I gave 13 years of my life to OSU and made career sacrifices to
   be there. I loved OSU and was proud to work there despite its occasional
   shortcomings (which I was trying to help address through our faculty union).
   Now I feel a profound resentment towards OSU for not valuing my
   contributions and rejecting me.

 * **Sad.** I'm sad that I now resent an institution that I gave so much to and
   loved. I'm sad that my failure has been so disruptive to my wife, my
   students, and our friends. I'm sad that my wife and I now have to choose
   between my career and living the life that we've made for ourselves. If I
   want to stay in academia, we will have to leave Corvallis, a city that we
   love and that's full of very dear friends, a place with 13 years worth of
   memories, a house that we've put years of sweat into making our own, and my
   wife's job, which is rewarding and that she enjoys. We haven't yet decided
   if that's the route we're taking, but the fact that we have to make it all
   is depressing.


## What I could have done better

**TODO**


## Things I'm proud of

**TODO**


[^rare]: It's unclear exactly how rare tenure denial is because it's a taboo
  topic and universities don't publish numbers about it. However, it seems to
  be somewhere in the 5-15%. There are two reasons tenure denial is rare:
  First, tenure-track positions are extremely competitive. There are dozens to
  literally hundreds of applicants to each open tenure-track position. While
  our hiring processes certainly do not always find the *best* people for these
  jobs as a whole, they at least tend to find people who can publish lots of
  papers, which is one of the most important criteria for tenure. Second, if
  you're not on track to get tenure, there are multiple points (annual
  department reviews, a larger third-year mid-tenure review) along the way
  where you're supposed to get that feedback so that you can leave gracefully
  before getting denied. More people leave before going up for tenure than are
  actually denied.

[^martin]: I want to give special thanks to my colleague, friend, and former
  advisor Martin Erwig, at this point. Martin basically gave me the reigns of
  the research group when I returned, allowing me to make my mark on it, and
  treated me from the outset as a highly respected colleague. Several folks I
  talked to when deciding whether to return to OSU were worried about the group
  dynamics of working with my former advisor. This was not an issue at all. Had
  I gotten tenure, I would be looking forward to many more years of working
  with Martin and excited to finally collaborate with him again.


[R1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research_I_university
[letter]: https://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~walkiner/files/Walkingshaw-PT-Grievance.pdf
[celebrate]: https://facultyaffairs.oregonstate.edu/2020-newly-tenured-faculty-0
